# NAME

Test::TUI::VT102 - Auxiliary module for handling \`vt102' terminals


# SYNOPSIS

~~~~~~~ {.Perl}
use Test::TUI::VT102 qw{ key };

my ($right, $left);

$right = key('Right');
$left = key('Left');
~~~~~~~


# DESCRIPTION

Some handling of terminals is rather complicated and involves querying
databases such as \`**termcap**'. This module implements helpers to ease
writing that sort of code.

An example would be finding out what escape-sequences the \`vt102' terminal
recognises for key-presses of special-keys such as the function keys, the
cursor/arrow-keys, home/end etc. That problem is solved by the \`**key**'
function, with the help of the \`**Term::Cap**' module.


# API

None of the functions listed here are exported automatically by default. You
either name them fully qualified or supply an import-list when importing the
module's code into your script.

`key`\ KEY-NAME

:   Looks up the proper escape sequence for the special key defined by
    \`**KEY-NAME**' for \`vt102' terminals by looking it up in the system's
    termcap database (lookup implemented by the *Term::Cap* module). If
    \`**KEY-NAME**' is unknown to \`Test::TUI::VT102', \`*key*' returns
    \`**undef**'. If the system's termcap database does not contain a
    escape-sequence for the requested key, an empty string is returned.
    Otherwise the escape-sequence is returned.


\`**KEY-NAME**' may be one of the following: *F1*..*F24*, *Home*, *End*,
*Insert*, *Backspace*, *Delete*, *Up*, *Down*, *Left*, *Right*, *PageUp*,
*PageDown*. These lookup strings are **case-sensitive**.


# SEE ALSO

*Test::TUI*, *Term::VT102*, *Term::Cap*


# AUTHOR

Frank Terbeck <ft@bewatermyfriend.org>


# COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE

Copyright (c) 2012-2016 Frank Terbeck <ft@bewatermyfriend.org>, All rights
reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:

  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above
     copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
     disclaimer.
  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
     copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
     disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials
     provided with the distribution.

 THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
 WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
 OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
 DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS OF THE
 PROJECT BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
 EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
 PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR
 PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY
 OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
 (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
 OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
