# NAME

Test::TUI::Inspect - Inspect Test::TUI's emulated terminal


# SYNOPSIS

~~~~~~~ {.Perl}
# Part from `example-script':

use Test::TUI::Inspect qw{ terminal_plain_line };

sub extract_main_slider_80x24 {
    return terminal_plain_line(1, 13, 13+25);
}
~~~~~~~


# DESCRIPTION

To write custom conditions, it is commonly required to "take a look" at
Test::TUI's internal emulate terminal in order to see whether or not the
condition is met. This module implements a few functions to do just that.


# API

None of the functions listed here are exported automatically by default. You
either name them fully qualified or supply an import-list when importing the
module's code into your script.

`terminal_line`

:   Return a line from the internal terminal buffer. This uses \`row_text()'
    from **Term::VT102**. See that module's reference manual for details.

`terminal_plain_line`

:   Like \`*terminal_line*', but uses \`row_plaintext()' from
    **Term::VT102** instead. See that module's reference manual for
    details.

`terminal_status`

:   Queries the status of the internal terminal and returns its findings as
    a hash-ref. The key that is always available is \`*state*', which is either
    **"inactive"** or **"active"**. If it is inactive, there will be no other
    defined keys. In case the terminal is active, the following keys are
    available, as well: *lines* and *columns* represent the size of the
    internal terminal; *cursor_x* and *cursor_y* describe the position of the
    terminal's cursor; *cursor_state* states whether or not the terminal's
    cursor is visible or not.


# SEE ALSO

*Test::TUI*, *Term::VT102*


# AUTHOR

Frank Terbeck <ft@bewatermyfriend.org>


# COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE

Copyright (c) 2012 Frank Terbeck <ft@bewatermyfriend.org>, All rights
reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:

  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above
     copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
     disclaimer.
  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
     copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
     disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials
     provided with the distribution.

 THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
 WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
 OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
 DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS OF THE
 PROJECT BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
 EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
 PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR
 PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY
 OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
 (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
 OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
